UPGRADING.md, before:

# Upgrade Guide

If you are skipping versions, work through these sections backwards from your
current version.

## 4.1.x → 5.0

1. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `http.accept_queue_limit`
    * `endpoint.iiif.content_disposition`
2. Note that Java 11 is now required.
3. The `X-IIIF-ID` reverse proxy header is no longer supported. Use
   `X-Forwarded-ID` instead.

## 4.0.x → 4.1

1. Rename the following configuration keys:
    * `HttpSource.trust_all_certs` to `HttpSource.allow_insecure`
    * `processor.[format]` to `processor.ManualSelectionStrategy.[format]`
    * `processor.fallback` to `processor.ManualSelectionStrategy.fallback`
2. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `max_scale`
    * `HttpSource.chunking.*`
    * `S3Source.chunking.*`
    * `AzureStorageSource.chunking.*`
    * `processor.selection_strategy`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `endpoint.public.auth.*`
    * `S3Source.max_connections`
    * `processor.normalize`
4. If you have implemented the `redirect()` or `authorized?()` delegate
   methods, migrate their logic into `authorize()` and remove them.
5. If you were using the `endpoint.public.auth.*` keys, you will need to use
   the new `authorize()` delegate method instead.
6. Note that `KakaduDemoProcessor` has been deprecated and may be removed in a
   future version. Consider migrating now to either `KakaduNativeProcessor` or
   `OpenJpegProcessor`.

## 4.0 → 4.0.x

Nothing to do.

## 3.4.x → 4.0

1. Rename the following configuration keys:
    * Any key containing the string `Resolver` to contain `Source`
    * `HttpSource.auth.*` to `HttpSource.BasicLookupStrategy.auth.*`
    * `AmazonS3Source.*` to `S3Source.*`
    * `StreamProcessor.retrieval_strategy` to
      `processor.stream_retrieval_strategy`
    * `KakaduProcessor.path_to_binaries` to
      `KakaduDemoProcessor.path_to_binaries`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.*` to `S3Cache.*`
2. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `S3Source.endpoint`
    * `S3Source.BasicLookupStrategy.path_prefix`
    * `S3Source.BasicLookupStrategy.path_suffix`
    * `processor.fallback_retrieval_strategy`
    * `processor.imageio.*`
    * `S3Cache.endpoint`
    * `cache.server.source.ttl_seconds`
    * `cache.server.derivative.ttl_seconds`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `S3Source.bucket.region`
    * `processor.limit_to_8_bits`
    * `S3Cache.bucket.region`
    * `cache.server.source.enabled`
    * `cache.server.ttl_seconds`
4. Change any `AmazonS3Source` configuration values to `S3Source`.
5. Change any configuration values containing `Resolver` to contain `Source`.
6. Change any `AmazonS3Cache` configuration values to `S3Cache`.
7. The delegate script architecture has changed, and the 3.x script is not
   compatible. See the "Delegate Script" section of the user manual for
   migration info.
8. The deprecated `DELETE /cache/:identifier` HTTP API method has been removed.
   See the "Remote Management" section of the user manual for information about
   its successor.
9. The `X-IIIF-ID` reverse proxy header is deprecated and will be removed in a
   future version. Start using `X-Forwarded-ID` instead.
10. If you'd like to use the new KakaduNativeProcessor non-commercially for
   decoding JPEG2000 images, see the "Processors" section of the user manual
   for information on configuring it.

## 3.4 → 3.4.x

Nothing to do.

## 3.3.x → 3.4

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `temp_pathname`
    * `http.http2.enabled`
    * `https.http2.enabled`
    * `http.accept_queue_limit`
    * `endpoint.iiif.min_size`
    * `endpoint.admin.username`
    * `HttpResolver.trust_all_certs`
    * `HttpResolver.request_timeout`
    * `AmazonS3Resolver.max_connections`
    * `processor.flv`
    * `processor.limit_to_8_bits`
    * `cache.server.source.enabled`
    * `cache.server.derivative.enabled`
    * `cache.server.info.enabled`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.max_connections`
    * `HeapCache.*`
    * `RedisCache.*`
    * `log.error.*`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `auth.*` to `endpoint.public.auth.*`
    * `admin.enabled` to `endpoint.admin.enabled`
    * `admin.password` to `endpoint.admin.secret`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.dpi` to `processor.dpi`
    * `cache.source` to `cache.server.source`
    * `cache.derivative` to `cache.server.derivative`
    * `metadata.*` to `processor.metadata.*`
3. If you are using the delegate script, add a `context` argument to the method
   signature of any existing source delegates. See `delegates.rb.sample` for
   examples.
4. The `DELETE /cache/:identifier` HTTP API method is deprecated and will be
   removed in version 4. Begin migrating now to the updated equivalent.
5. Managing the cache on the command line with VM arguments is deprecated and
   will be removed in version 4. Begin migrating now to the cache management
   methods in the HTTP API.

## 3.3 → 3.3.5

Nothing to do.

## 3.2.x → 3.3

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `delegate_script.cache.enabled`
    * `endpoint.api.*`
    * `processor.dcm`
    * `processor.normalize`
    * `processor.background_color`
    * `processor.upscale_filter`
    * `processor.downscale_filter`
    * `processor.sharpen`
    * `processor.jpg.progressive`
    * `processor.jpg.quality`
    * `processor.tif.compression`
    * `cache.server.ttl_seconds`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.type`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.string`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.string.*`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `watermark.*` to `overlays.*`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `JdbcResolver.max_pool_size`
    * `FfmpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.background_color`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.background_color`
    * `JaiProcessor.sharpen`
    * `JaiProcessor.jpg.quality`
    * `JaiProcessor.tif.compression`
    * `Java2dProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.sharpen`
    * `Java2dProcessor.jpg.quality`
    * `Java2dProcessor.tif.compression`
    * `KakaduProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.sharpen`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.sharpen`
    * `FilesystemCache.ttl_seconds`
    * `JdbcCache.max_pool_size`
    * `JdbcCache.ttl_seconds`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.ttl_seconds`
    * `AzureStorageCache.ttl_seconds`
4. If you are using FilesystemCache, purge your cache.
5. If you are using the `authorized?()` or `watermark()` delegate methods, note
   that the contents of the `operations` argument have changed; see the new
   sample delegate script for more information.
6. If you are using the `watermark()` delegate method, note that the `pathname`
   key in the returned hash must be changed to `image`.
7. Rename the `watermark()` delegate method to `overlay()`.

## 3.2 → 3.2.4

Nothing to do.

## 3.1.2 → 3.2

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `FfmpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `JaiProcessor.sharpen`
    * `Java2dProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.sharpen`
    * `KakaduProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.sharpen`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.sharpen`
    * `metadata.*`
2. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `Java2dProcessor.scale_mode`
    * `KakaduProcessor.post_processor.*`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.post_processor.*`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.post_processor.*`

## 3.1.1 → 3.1.2

Nothing to do.

## 3.1 → 3.1.1

* Add the `http.host` and `https.host` keys from the sample configuration.

## 3.0.1 → 3.1

* Replace the `get_iiif2_service` delegate script method with
  `extra_iiif2_information_response_keys`.

## 3.0 → 3.0.1

Nothing to do.

## 2.2 → 3.0

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `admin.*`
    * `delegate_script.enabled`
    * `endpoint.iiif.2.restrict_to_sizes`
    * `StreamProcessor.retrieval_strategy`
    * `cache.source`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.*`
    * `AzureStorageCache.*`
    * `redaction.enabled`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `delegate_script` to `delegate_script.pathname`
    * `cache.server` to `cache.derivative`
3. Remove the following keys:
    * `JdbcResolver.function.*`
4. Add the following methods from the sample delegate script:
    * `redactions`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_database_identifier`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_media_type`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_lookup_sql`
5. Rename the following delegate script methods:
    * `Cantaloupe::get_pathname` to
      `Cantaloupe::FilesystemResolver::get_pathname`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_url` to `Cantaloupe::HttpResolver::get_url`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_azure_storage_blob_key` to
      `Cantaloupe::AzureStorageResolver::get_blob_key`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_s3_object_key` to
      `Cantaloupe::AmazonS3Resolver::get_object_key`
6. If you are using JdbcResolver, be aware that the `JdbcResolver.function.*`
   configuration keys are now obsolete, and these functions will have to be
   rewritten as delegate script methods.
7. If you are using JdbcCache, modify your database schema:
   ```
   ALTER TABLE {JdbcCache.info_table} CHANGE COLUMN last_modified last_accessed;
   ALTER TABLE {JdbcCache.derivative_image_table} CHANGE COLUMN last_modified last_accessed;
   ```
8. Note that the information that used to be available on the landing page
   (`/`) has moved to the Control Panel (`/admin`). Log in with a username of
   `admin` and the password defined in the `admin.password` configuration
   option.

Commit message:

Redesign the metadata-handling architecture
* Info exposes a Metadata
* Metadata contains normalized & serializable EXIF, IPTC, and XMP
* Add a `complete` property to Info; incomplete Infos are not cached
* Orientation is read from Metadata rather than being stored in Info
* Orientation is always respected (`processor.metadata.respect_orientation` config key is removed)
* Add a `metadata()` delegate method
* Remove `processor.metadata.preserve` key (this is now done via metadata())
* Move `e.i.l.c.p.codec` readers & writers into format-specific subpackages
* Improve general EXIF, IPTC, and XMP reading/writing
* Replace MetadataCopy with Encode.metadata

UPGRADING.md, after:

# Upgrade Guide

If you are skipping versions, work through these sections backwards from your
current version.

## 4.1.x → 5.0

1. Note that Java 11 is now required.
2. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `http.accept_queue_limit`
    * `endpoint.iiif.content_disposition`
    * `processor.metadata.*`
3. The `X-IIIF-ID` reverse proxy header is no longer supported. Use
   `X-Forwarded-ID` instead.
4. If your `processor.metadata.preserve` key has been set to `true`, and you've
   been using a derivative cache, you should purge it.
5. If you were using the `processor.metadata.preserve` key, you will need to use
   the new `metadata()` delegate method instead.

## 4.0.x → 4.1

1. Rename the following configuration keys:
    * `HttpSource.trust_all_certs` to `HttpSource.allow_insecure`
    * `processor.[format]` to `processor.ManualSelectionStrategy.[format]`
    * `processor.fallback` to `processor.ManualSelectionStrategy.fallback`
2. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `max_scale`
    * `HttpSource.chunking.*`
    * `S3Source.chunking.*`
    * `AzureStorageSource.chunking.*`
    * `processor.selection_strategy`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `endpoint.public.auth.*`
    * `S3Source.max_connections`
    * `processor.normalize`
4. If you have implemented the `redirect()` or `authorized?()` delegate
   methods, migrate their logic into `authorize()` and remove them.
5. If you were using the `endpoint.public.auth.*` keys, you will need to use
   the new `authorize()` delegate method instead.
6. Note that `KakaduDemoProcessor` has been deprecated and may be removed in a
   future version. Consider migrating now to either `KakaduNativeProcessor` or
   `OpenJpegProcessor`.

## 4.0 → 4.0.x

Nothing to do.

## 3.4.x → 4.0

1. Rename the following configuration keys:
    * Any key containing the string `Resolver` to contain `Source`
    * `HttpSource.auth.*` to `HttpSource.BasicLookupStrategy.auth.*`
    * `AmazonS3Source.*` to `S3Source.*`
    * `StreamProcessor.retrieval_strategy` to
      `processor.stream_retrieval_strategy`
    * `KakaduProcessor.path_to_binaries` to
      `KakaduDemoProcessor.path_to_binaries`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.*` to `S3Cache.*`
2. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `S3Source.endpoint`
    * `S3Source.BasicLookupStrategy.path_prefix`
    * `S3Source.BasicLookupStrategy.path_suffix`
    * `processor.fallback_retrieval_strategy`
    * `processor.imageio.*`
    * `S3Cache.endpoint`
    * `cache.server.source.ttl_seconds`
    * `cache.server.derivative.ttl_seconds`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `S3Source.bucket.region`
    * `processor.limit_to_8_bits`
    * `S3Cache.bucket.region`
    * `cache.server.source.enabled`
    * `cache.server.ttl_seconds`
4. Change any `AmazonS3Source` configuration values to `S3Source`.
5. Change any configuration values containing `Resolver` to contain `Source`.
6. Change any `AmazonS3Cache` configuration values to `S3Cache`.
7. The delegate script architecture has changed, and the 3.x script is not
   compatible. See the "Delegate Script" section of the user manual for
   migration info.
8. The deprecated `DELETE /cache/:identifier` HTTP API method has been removed.
   See the "Remote Management" section of the user manual for information about
   its successor.
9. The `X-IIIF-ID` reverse proxy header is deprecated and will be removed in a
   future version. Start using `X-Forwarded-ID` instead.
10. If you'd like to use the new KakaduNativeProcessor non-commercially for
   decoding JPEG2000 images, see the "Processors" section of the user manual
   for information on configuring it.

## 3.4 → 3.4.x

Nothing to do.

## 3.3.x → 3.4

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `temp_pathname`
    * `http.http2.enabled`
    * `https.http2.enabled`
    * `http.accept_queue_limit`
    * `endpoint.iiif.min_size`
    * `endpoint.admin.username`
    * `HttpResolver.trust_all_certs`
    * `HttpResolver.request_timeout`
    * `AmazonS3Resolver.max_connections`
    * `processor.flv`
    * `processor.limit_to_8_bits`
    * `cache.server.source.enabled`
    * `cache.server.derivative.enabled`
    * `cache.server.info.enabled`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.max_connections`
    * `HeapCache.*`
    * `RedisCache.*`
    * `log.error.*`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `auth.*` to `endpoint.public.auth.*`
    * `admin.enabled` to `endpoint.admin.enabled`
    * `admin.password` to `endpoint.admin.secret`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.dpi` to `processor.dpi`
    * `cache.source` to `cache.server.source`
    * `cache.derivative` to `cache.server.derivative`
    * `metadata.*` to `processor.metadata.*`
3. If you are using the delegate script, add a `context` argument to the method
   signature of any existing source delegates. See `delegates.rb.sample` for
   examples.
4. The `DELETE /cache/:identifier` HTTP API method is deprecated and will be
   removed in version 4. Begin migrating now to the updated equivalent.
5. Managing the cache on the command line with VM arguments is deprecated and
   will be removed in version 4. Begin migrating now to the cache management
   methods in the HTTP API.

## 3.3 → 3.3.5

Nothing to do.

## 3.2.x → 3.3

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `delegate_script.cache.enabled`
    * `endpoint.api.*`
    * `processor.dcm`
    * `processor.normalize`
    * `processor.background_color`
    * `processor.upscale_filter`
    * `processor.downscale_filter`
    * `processor.sharpen`
    * `processor.jpg.progressive`
    * `processor.jpg.quality`
    * `processor.tif.compression`
    * `cache.server.ttl_seconds`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.type`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.string`
    * `overlays.BasicStrategy.string.*`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `watermark.*` to `overlays.*`
3. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `JdbcResolver.max_pool_size`
    * `FfmpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.background_color`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.background_color`
    * `JaiProcessor.sharpen`
    * `JaiProcessor.jpg.quality`
    * `JaiProcessor.tif.compression`
    * `Java2dProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.sharpen`
    * `Java2dProcessor.jpg.quality`
    * `Java2dProcessor.tif.compression`
    * `KakaduProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.sharpen`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.sharpen`
    * `FilesystemCache.ttl_seconds`
    * `JdbcCache.max_pool_size`
    * `JdbcCache.ttl_seconds`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.ttl_seconds`
    * `AzureStorageCache.ttl_seconds`
4. If you are using FilesystemCache, purge your cache.
5. If you are using the `authorized?()` or `watermark()` delegate methods, note
   that the contents of the `operations` argument have changed; see the new
   sample delegate script for more information.
6. If you are using the `watermark()` delegate method, note that the `pathname`
   key in the returned hash must be changed to `image`.
7. Rename the `watermark()` delegate method to `overlay()`.

## 3.2 → 3.2.4

Nothing to do.

## 3.1.2 → 3.2

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `FfmpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `GraphicsMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `ImageMagickProcessor.sharpen`
    * `JaiProcessor.sharpen`
    * `Java2dProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `Java2dProcessor.sharpen`
    * `KakaduProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `KakaduProcessor.sharpen`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.sharpen`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.upscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.downscale_filter`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.sharpen`
    * `metadata.*`
2. Remove the following configuration keys:
    * `Java2dProcessor.scale_mode`
    * `KakaduProcessor.post_processor.*`
    * `OpenJpegProcessor.post_processor.*`
    * `PdfBoxProcessor.post_processor.*`

## 3.1.1 → 3.1.2

Nothing to do.

## 3.1 → 3.1.1

* Add the `http.host` and `https.host` keys from the sample configuration.

## 3.0.1 → 3.1

* Replace the `get_iiif2_service` delegate script method with
  `extra_iiif2_information_response_keys`.

## 3.0 → 3.0.1

Nothing to do.

## 2.2 → 3.0

1. Add the following keys from the sample configuration:
    * `admin.*`
    * `delegate_script.enabled`
    * `endpoint.iiif.2.restrict_to_sizes`
    * `StreamProcessor.retrieval_strategy`
    * `cache.source`
    * `AmazonS3Cache.*`
    * `AzureStorageCache.*`
    * `redaction.enabled`
2. Rename the following keys:
    * `delegate_script` to `delegate_script.pathname`
    * `cache.server` to `cache.derivative`
3. Remove the following keys:
    * `JdbcResolver.function.*`
4. Add the following methods from the sample delegate script:
    * `redactions`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_database_identifier`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_media_type`
    * `Cantaloupe::JdbcResolver::get_lookup_sql`
5. Rename the following delegate script methods:
    * `Cantaloupe::get_pathname` to
      `Cantaloupe::FilesystemResolver::get_pathname`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_url` to `Cantaloupe::HttpResolver::get_url`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_azure_storage_blob_key` to
      `Cantaloupe::AzureStorageResolver::get_blob_key`
    * `Cantaloupe::get_s3_object_key` to
      `Cantaloupe::AmazonS3Resolver::get_object_key`
6. If you are using JdbcResolver, be aware that the `JdbcResolver.function.*`
   configuration keys are now obsolete, and these functions will have to be
   rewritten as delegate script methods.
7. If you are using JdbcCache, modify your database schema:
   ```
   ALTER TABLE {JdbcCache.info_table} CHANGE COLUMN last_modified last_accessed;
   ALTER TABLE {JdbcCache.derivative_image_table} CHANGE COLUMN last_modified last_accessed;
   ```
8. Note that the information that used to be available on the landing page
   (`/`) has moved to the Control Panel (`/admin`). Log in with a username of
   `admin` and the password defined in the `admin.password` configuration
   option.
